doc/reference/reports.rst, before:

:banner: banners/reports.jpg

.. highlight:: xml

.. _reference/reports:

============
QWeb Reports
============

Reports are written in HTML/QWeb, like all regular views in Odoo. You can use
the usual :ref:`QWeb control flow tools <reference/qweb>`. The PDF rendering
itself is performed by wkhtmltopdf_.

If you want to create a report on a certain model, you will need to define
this :ref:`reference/reports/report` and the
:ref:`reference/reports/templates` it will use. If you wish, you can also
specify a specific :ref:`reference/reports/paper_formats` for this
report. Finally, if you need access to more than your model, you can define a
:ref:`reference/reports/custom_reports` class that gives you access to more
models and records in the template.

.. _reference/reports/report:

Report
======

Every report must be declared by a :ref:`report action
<reference/actions/report>`.

For simplicity, a shortcut ``<report>`` element is available to define a
report, rather than have to set up :ref:`the action
<reference/actions/report>` and its surroundings manually. That ``<report>``
can take the following attributes:

``id``
    the generated record's :term:`external id`
``name`` (mandatory)
    only useful as a mnemonic/description of the report when looking for one
    in a list of some sort
``model`` (mandatory)
    the model your report will be about
``report_type`` (mandatory)
    either ``qweb-pdf`` for PDF reports or ``qweb-html`` for HTML
``report_name``
    the name of your report (which will be the name of the PDF output)
``groups``
    :class:`~odoo.fields.Many2many` field to the groups allowed to view/use
    the current report
``attachment_use``
    if set to True, the report will be stored as an attachment of the record
    using the name generated by the ``attachment`` expression; you can use
    this if you need your report to be generated only once (for legal reasons,
    for example)
``attachment``
    python expression that defines the name of the report; the record is
    acessible as the variable ``object``
``paperformat``
    external id of the paperformat you wish to use (defaults to the company's
    paperformat if not specified)

Example::

    <report
        id="account_invoices"
        model="account.invoice"
        string="Invoices"
        report_type="qweb-pdf"
        name="account.report_invoice"
        file="account.report_invoice"
        attachment_use="True"
        attachment="(object.state in ('open','paid')) and
            ('INV'+(object.number or '').replace('/','')+'.pdf')"
    />

.. _reference/reports/templates:

Report template
===============


Minimal viable template
-----------------------

A minimal template would look like::

    <template id="report_invoice">
        <t t-call="web.html_container">
            <t t-foreach="docs" t-as="o">
                <t t-call="web.external_layout">
                    <div class="page">
                        <h2>Report title</h2>
                        <p>This object's name is <span t-field="o.name"/></p>
                    </div>
                </t>
            </t>
        </t>
    </template>

Calling ``external_layout`` will add the default header and footer on your
report. The PDF body will be the content inside the ``<div
class="page">``. The template's ``id`` must be the name specified in the
report declaration; for example ``account.report_invoice`` for the above
report. Since this is a QWeb template, you can access all the fields of the
``docs`` objects received by the template.

There are some specific variables accessible in reports, mainly:

``docs``
    records for the current report
``doc_ids``
    list of ids for the ``docs`` records
``doc_model``
    model for the ``docs`` records
``time``
    a reference to :mod:`python:time` from the Python standard library
``user``
    ``res.user`` record for the user printing the report
``res_company``
    record for the current ``user``'s company

If you wish to access other records/models in the template, you will need
:ref:`a custom report <reference/reports/custom_reports>`.

Translatable Templates
----------------------

If you wish to translate reports (to the language of a partner, for example),
you need to define two templates:

* The main report template
* The translatable document

You can then call the translatable document from your main template with the attribute
``t-lang`` set to a language code (for example ``fr`` or ``en_US``) or to a record field.
You will also need to re-browse the related records with the proper context if you use
fields that are translatable (like country names, sales conditions, etc.)

.. warning::

    If your report template does not use translatable record fields, re-browsing the record
    in another language is *not* necessary and will impact performances.

For example, let's look at the Sale Order report from the Sale module::

    <!-- Main template -->
    <template id="report_saleorder">
        <t t-call="web.html_container">
            <t t-foreach="docs" t-as="doc">
                <t t-call="sale.report_saleorder_document" t-lang="doc.partner_id.lang"/>
            </t>
        </t>
    </template>

    <!-- Translatable template -->
    <template id="report_saleorder_document">
        <!-- Re-browse of the record with the partner lang -->
        <t t-set="doc" t-value="doc.with_context(lang=doc.partner_id.lang)" />
        <t t-call="web.external_layout">
            <div class="page">
                <div class="oe_structure"/>
                <div class="row">
                    <div class="col-6">
                        <strong t-if="doc.partner_shipping_id == doc.partner_invoice_id">Invoice and shipping address:</strong>
                        <strong t-if="doc.partner_shipping_id != doc.partner_invoice_id">Invoice address:</strong>
                        <div t-field="doc.partner_invoice_id" t-options="{&quot;no_marker&quot;: True}"/>
                    <...>
                <div class="oe_structure"/>
            </div>
        </t>
    </template>


The main template calls the translatable template with ``doc.partner_id.lang`` as a
``t-lang`` parameter, so it will be rendered in the language of the partner. This way,
each Sale Order will be printed in the language of the corresponding customer. If you wish
to translate only the body of the document, but keep the header and footer in a default
language, you could call the report's external layout this way::

    <t t-call="web.external_layout" t-lang="en_US">

.. tip::

    Please take note that this works only when calling external templates, you will not be
    able to translate part of a document by setting a ``t-lang`` attribute on an xml node other
    than ``t-call``. If you wish to translate part of a template, you can create an external
    template with this partial template and call it from the main one with the ``t-lang``
    attribute.


Barcodes
--------

Barcodes are images returned by a controller and can easily be embedded in
reports thanks to the QWeb syntax (e.g. see :ref:`reference/qweb/attributes`):

.. code-block:: html

    <img t-att-src="'/report/barcode/QR/%s' % 'My text in qr code'"/>

More parameters can be passed as a query string

.. code-block:: html

    <img t-att-src="'/report/barcode/?
        type=%s&value=%s&width=%s&height=%s'%('QR', 'text', 200, 200)"/>


Useful Remarks
--------------
* Twitter Bootstrap and FontAwesome classes can be used in your report
  template
* Local CSS can be put directly in the template
* Global CSS can be inserted in the main report layout by inheriting its
  template and inserting your CSS::

    <template id="report_saleorder_style" inherit_id="report.style">
      <xpath expr=".">
        <t>
          .example-css-class {
            background-color: red;
          }
        </t>
      </xpath>
    </template>
* If it appears that your PDF report is missing the styles, please check
  :ref:`these instructions <reference/backend/reporting/printed-reports/pdf-without-styles>`.

.. _reference/reports/paper_formats:

Paper Format
============

Paper formats are records of ``report.paperformat`` and can contain the
following attributes:

``name`` (mandatory)
    only useful as a mnemonic/description of the report when looking for one
    in a list of some sort
``description``
    a small description of your format
``format``
    either a predefined format (A0 to A9, B0 to B10, Legal, Letter,
    Tabloid,...) or ``custom``; A4 by default. You cannot use a non-custom
    format if you define the page dimensions.
``dpi``
    output DPI; 90 by default
``margin_top``, ``margin_bottom``, ``margin_left``, ``margin_right``
    margin sizes in mm
``page_height``, ``page_width``
    page dimensions in mm
``orientation``
    Landscape or Portrait
``header_line``
    boolean to display a header line
``header_spacing``
    header spacing in mm

Example::

    <record id="paperformat_frenchcheck" model="report.paperformat">
        <field name="name">French Bank Check</field>
        <field name="default" eval="True"/>
        <field name="format">custom</field>
        <field name="page_height">80</field>
        <field name="page_width">175</field>
        <field name="orientation">Portrait</field>
        <field name="margin_top">3</field>
        <field name="margin_bottom">3</field>
        <field name="margin_left">3</field>
        <field name="margin_right">3</field>
        <field name="header_line" eval="False"/>
        <field name="header_spacing">3</field>
        <field name="dpi">80</field>
    </record>

.. _reference/reports/custom_reports:

Custom Reports
==============

The report model has a default ``get_html`` function that looks for a model
named :samp:`report.{module.report_name}`. If it exists, it will use it to
call the QWeb engine; otherwise a generic function will be used. If you wish
to customize your reports by including more things in the template (like
records of others models, for example), you can define this model, overwrite
the function ``_get_report_values`` and pass objects in the ``docargs`` dictionary:

.. code-block:: python

    from odoo import api, models

    class ParticularReport(models.AbstractModel):
        _name = 'report.module.report_name'

        @api.model
        def _get_report_values(self, docids, data=None):
            report_obj = self.env['ir.actions.report']
            report = report_obj._get_report_from_name('module.report_name')
            docargs = {
                'doc_ids': docids,
                'doc_model': report.model,
                'docs': self,
            }
            return docargs

.. _reference/reports/custom_fonts:

Custom fonts
============
If you want to use custom fonts you will need to add your custom font and the related less/CSS to the ``web.reports_assets_common`` assets bundle. 
Adding your custom font(s) to ``web.assets_common`` or ``web.assets_backend`` will not make your font available in QWeb reports.

Example::

    <template id="report_assets_common_custom_fonts" name="Custom QWeb fonts" inherit_id="web.report_assets_common">
        <xpath expr="." position="inside">
            <link href="/your_module/static/src/less/fonts.less" rel="stylesheet" type="text/less"/>
        </xpath>
    </template>

You will need to define your ``@font-face`` within this less file, even if you've used in another assets bundle (other than ``web.reports_assets_common``).

Example::

    @font-face {
        font-family: 'MonixBold';
        src: local('MonixBold'), local('MonixBold'), url(/your_module/static/src/fonts/MonixBold-Regular.otf) format('opentype');
    }

    .h1-title-big {
        font-family: MonixBold;
        font-size: 60px;
        color: #3399cc;
    }

After you've added the less into your assets bundle you can use the classes - in this example ``h1-title-big`` - in your custom QWeb report.

Reports are web pages
=====================

Reports are dynamically generated by the report module and can be accessed
directly via URL:

For example, you can access a Sale Order report in html mode by going to
\http://<server-address>/report/html/sale.report_saleorder/38

Or you can access the pdf version at
\http://<server-address>/report/pdf/sale.report_saleorder/38

.. _wkhtmltopdf: https://wkhtmltopdf.org

Commit message:

[FIX] doc: unclear report actions fields and report tag attributes.

doc/reference/reports.rst, after:

:banner: banners/reports.jpg

.. highlight:: xml

.. _reference/reports:

============
QWeb Reports
============

Reports are written in HTML/QWeb, like all regular views in Odoo. You can use
the usual :ref:`QWeb control flow tools <reference/qweb>`. The PDF rendering
itself is performed by wkhtmltopdf_.

If you want to create a report on a certain model, you will need to define
this :ref:`reference/reports/report` and the
:ref:`reference/reports/templates` it will use. If you wish, you can also
specify a specific :ref:`reference/reports/paper_formats` for this
report. Finally, if you need access to more than your model, you can define a
:ref:`reference/reports/custom_reports` class that gives you access to more
models and records in the template.

.. _reference/reports/report:

Report
======

Every report must be declared by a :ref:`report action
<reference/actions/report>`.

For simplicity, a shortcut ``<report>`` element is available to define a
report, rather than have to set up :ref:`the action
<reference/actions/report>` and its surroundings manually. That ``<report>``
can take the following attributes:

``id``
    the generated record's :term:`external id`
``string`` (mapping to ``IrActionsReport.name`` field)
    If ``print_report_name`` isn't specified, will be used as file name.
    Otherwise, only useful as a mnemonic/description of the report
    when looking for one in a list of some sort
``name`` (mandatory) (mapping to ``IrActionsReport.report_name`` field)
    the name of the template used to render the report
``model`` (mandatory)
    the model your report will be about
``report_type`` (mandatory)
    either ``qweb-pdf`` for PDF reports or ``qweb-html`` for HTML
``print_report_name``
    python expression defining the name of the report.
``groups``
    :class:`~odoo.fields.Many2many` field to the groups allowed to view/use
    the current report
``attachment_use``
    if set to True, the report will be stored as an attachment of the record
    using the name generated by the ``attachment`` expression; you can use
    this if you need your report to be generated only once (for legal reasons,
    for example)
``attachment``
    python expression that defines the name of the report; the record is
    acessible as the variable ``object``
``paperformat``
    external id of the paperformat you wish to use (defaults to the company's
    paperformat if not specified)

Example::

    <report
        id="account_invoices"
        model="account.invoice"
        string="Invoices"
        name="account.report_invoice"
        report_type="qweb-pdf"
        print_report_name="object._get_report_filename()"
        attachment_use="True"
        attachment="(object.state in ('open','paid')) and
            ('INV'+(object.number or '').replace('/','')+'.pdf')"
    />

.. _reference/reports/templates:

Report template
===============


Minimal viable template
-----------------------

A minimal template would look like::

    <template id="report_invoice">
        <t t-call="web.html_container">
            <t t-foreach="docs" t-as="o">
                <t t-call="web.external_layout">
                    <div class="page">
                        <h2>Report title</h2>
                        <p>This object's name is <span t-field="o.name"/></p>
                    </div>
                </t>
            </t>
        </t>
    </template>

Calling ``external_layout`` will add the default header and footer on your
report. The PDF body will be the content inside the ``<div
class="page">``. The template's ``id`` must be the name specified in the
report declaration; for example ``account.report_invoice`` for the above
report. Since this is a QWeb template, you can access all the fields of the
``docs`` objects received by the template.

There are some specific variables accessible in reports, mainly:

``docs``
    records for the current report
``doc_ids``
    list of ids for the ``docs`` records
``doc_model``
    model for the ``docs`` records
``time``
    a reference to :mod:`python:time` from the Python standard library
``user``
    ``res.user`` record for the user printing the report
``res_company``
    record for the current ``user``'s company

If you wish to access other records/models in the template, you will need
:ref:`a custom report <reference/reports/custom_reports>`.

Translatable Templates
----------------------

If you wish to translate reports (to the language of a partner, for example),
you need to define two templates:

* The main report template
* The translatable document

You can then call the translatable document from your main template with the attribute
``t-lang`` set to a language code (for example ``fr`` or ``en_US``) or to a record field.
You will also need to re-browse the related records with the proper context if you use
fields that are translatable (like country names, sales conditions, etc.)

.. warning::

    If your report template does not use translatable record fields, re-browsing the record
    in another language is *not* necessary and will impact performances.

For example, let's look at the Sale Order report from the Sale module::

    <!-- Main template -->
    <template id="report_saleorder">
        <t t-call="web.html_container">
            <t t-foreach="docs" t-as="doc">
                <t t-call="sale.report_saleorder_document" t-lang="doc.partner_id.lang"/>
            </t>
        </t>
    </template>

    <!-- Translatable template -->
    <template id="report_saleorder_document">
        <!-- Re-browse of the record with the partner lang -->
        <t t-set="doc" t-value="doc.with_context(lang=doc.partner_id.lang)" />
        <t t-call="web.external_layout">
            <div class="page">
                <div class="oe_structure"/>
                <div class="row">
                    <div class="col-6">
                        <strong t-if="doc.partner_shipping_id == doc.partner_invoice_id">Invoice and shipping address:</strong>
                        <strong t-if="doc.partner_shipping_id != doc.partner_invoice_id">Invoice address:</strong>
                        <div t-field="doc.partner_invoice_id" t-options="{&quot;no_marker&quot;: True}"/>
                    <...>
                <div class="oe_structure"/>
            </div>
        </t>
    </template>


The main template calls the translatable template with ``doc.partner_id.lang`` as a
``t-lang`` parameter, so it will be rendered in the language of the partner. This way,
each Sale Order will be printed in the language of the corresponding customer. If you wish
to translate only the body of the document, but keep the header and footer in a default
language, you could call the report's external layout this way::

    <t t-call="web.external_layout" t-lang="en_US">

.. tip::

    Please take note that this works only when calling external templates, you will not be
    able to translate part of a document by setting a ``t-lang`` attribute on an xml node other
    than ``t-call``. If you wish to translate part of a template, you can create an external
    template with this partial template and call it from the main one with the ``t-lang``
    attribute.


Barcodes
--------

Barcodes are images returned by a controller and can easily be embedded in
reports thanks to the QWeb syntax (e.g. see :ref:`reference/qweb/attributes`):

.. code-block:: html

    <img t-att-src="'/report/barcode/QR/%s' % 'My text in qr code'"/>

More parameters can be passed as a query string

.. code-block:: html

    <img t-att-src="'/report/barcode/?
        type=%s&value=%s&width=%s&height=%s'%('QR', 'text', 200, 200)"/>


Useful Remarks
--------------
* Twitter Bootstrap and FontAwesome classes can be used in your report
  template
* Local CSS can be put directly in the template
* Global CSS can be inserted in the main report layout by inheriting its
  template and inserting your CSS::

    <template id="report_saleorder_style" inherit_id="report.style">
      <xpath expr=".">
        <t>
          .example-css-class {
            background-color: red;
          }
        </t>
      </xpath>
    </template>
* If it appears that your PDF report is missing the styles, please check
  :ref:`these instructions <reference/backend/reporting/printed-reports/pdf-without-styles>`.

.. _reference/reports/paper_formats:

Paper Format
============

Paper formats are records of ``report.paperformat`` and can contain the
following attributes:

``name`` (mandatory)
    only useful as a mnemonic/description of the report when looking for one
    in a list of some sort
``description``
    a small description of your format
``format``
    either a predefined format (A0 to A9, B0 to B10, Legal, Letter,
    Tabloid,...) or ``custom``; A4 by default. You cannot use a non-custom
    format if you define the page dimensions.
``dpi``
    output DPI; 90 by default
``margin_top``, ``margin_bottom``, ``margin_left``, ``margin_right``
    margin sizes in mm
``page_height``, ``page_width``
    page dimensions in mm
``orientation``
    Landscape or Portrait
``header_line``
    boolean to display a header line
``header_spacing``
    header spacing in mm

Example::

    <record id="paperformat_frenchcheck" model="report.paperformat">
        <field name="name">French Bank Check</field>
        <field name="default" eval="True"/>
        <field name="format">custom</field>
        <field name="page_height">80</field>
        <field name="page_width">175</field>
        <field name="orientation">Portrait</field>
        <field name="margin_top">3</field>
        <field name="margin_bottom">3</field>
        <field name="margin_left">3</field>
        <field name="margin_right">3</field>
        <field name="header_line" eval="False"/>
        <field name="header_spacing">3</field>
        <field name="dpi">80</field>
    </record>

.. _reference/reports/custom_reports:

Custom Reports
==============

The report model has a default ``get_html`` function that looks for a model
named :samp:`report.{module.report_name}`. If it exists, it will use it to
call the QWeb engine; otherwise a generic function will be used. If you wish
to customize your reports by including more things in the template (like
records of others models, for example), you can define this model, overwrite
the function ``_get_report_values`` and pass objects in the ``docargs`` dictionary:

.. code-block:: python

    from odoo import api, models

    class ParticularReport(models.AbstractModel):
        _name = 'report.module.report_name'

        @api.model
        def _get_report_values(self, docids, data=None):
            report_obj = self.env['ir.actions.report']
            report = report_obj._get_report_from_name('module.report_name')
            docargs = {
                'doc_ids': docids,
                'doc_model': report.model,
                'docs': self,
            }
            return docargs

.. _reference/reports/custom_fonts:

Custom fonts
============
If you want to use custom fonts you will need to add your custom font and the related less/CSS to the ``web.reports_assets_common`` assets bundle.
Adding your custom font(s) to ``web.assets_common`` or ``web.assets_backend`` will not make your font available in QWeb reports.

Example::

    <template id="report_assets_common_custom_fonts" name="Custom QWeb fonts" inherit_id="web.report_assets_common">
        <xpath expr="." position="inside">
            <link href="/your_module/static/src/less/fonts.less" rel="stylesheet" type="text/less"/>
        </xpath>
    </template>

You will need to define your ``@font-face`` within this less file, even if you've used in another assets bundle (other than ``web.reports_assets_common``).

Example::

    @font-face {
        font-family: 'MonixBold';
        src: local('MonixBold'), local('MonixBold'), url(/your_module/static/src/fonts/MonixBold-Regular.otf) format('opentype');
    }

    .h1-title-big {
        font-family: MonixBold;
        font-size: 60px;
        color: #3399cc;
    }

After you've added the less into your assets bundle you can use the classes - in this example ``h1-title-big`` - in your custom QWeb report.

Reports are web pages
=====================

Reports are dynamically generated by the report module and can be accessed
directly via URL:

For example, you can access a Sale Order report in html mode by going to
\http://<server-address>/report/html/sale.report_saleorder/38

Or you can access the pdf version at
\http://<server-address>/report/pdf/sale.report_saleorder/38

.. _wkhtmltopdf: https://wkhtmltopdf.org
